README.md, before:

# Geometric Refinement Theory

**A Machine-Verified Categorical Framework Unifying Geometry, Spectral Theory, and Probability**

[![Lean 4](https://img.shields.io/badge/Lean-4-blue.svg)](https://leanprover.github.io/)
[![Mathlib](https://img.shields.io/badge/Mathlib-latest-green.svg)](https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib4)
[![CI](https://github.com/RoyGBivens137/LEAN-Repository-for-Refinement-Operator-Calculus/actions/workflows/lean_action_ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/RoyGBivens137/LEAN-Repository-for-Refinement-Operator-Calculus/actions)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache_2.0-orange.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/Apache-2.0)

## Overview

This repository contains a **Lean 4 formalization** of Geometric Refinement Theory (GRT), demonstrating that geometry, probability, and spectral physics arise from a single algebraic primitive: the GL(n) action on positive density fields (Jacobians).

The central result is the **Casimir Universality Theorem**, proving that the diagram

```
Geom ──────→ Spectral ──────→ Gibbs
  │                              │
  └──────────────────────────────┘
              (commutes)
```

commutes via the partition function Z(β) = Tr(e^{-βĤ}).

## Key Results

| Result | Description | Proof Status |
|--------|-------------|--------------|
| Casimir Universality | Categorical functor composition equality | `rfl` |
| Coboundary Nilpotency | d² = 0 for discrete exterior calculus | Proved |
| Cartan Identity | dκ + κd = (p+1)·id on p-cochains | Proved |
| Partition Function | Z(β) = 1/(1 - m^{-β}) | Proved |
| Gibbs Normalization | Σ ω_β(k) = 1 | Proved |

## File Structure

```
├── CombinatorialDEC.lean      # Discrete exterior calculus (358 lines, 0 sorry)
├── RefinementAxioms.lean      # 11 axioms with Hodge theory
├── RefinementAlgebra.lean     # GL(n) action and rigidity
├── CasimirUniversality.lean   # Main theorem (339 lines, 0 sorry)
└── lakefile.toml              # Build configuration
```

**Total: 12 axioms**, each corresponding to established results from optimal transport, discrete exterior calculus, and profinite group theory.

## The Core Idea

Refinement is fundamentally algebraic. The decomposition

**GL(n) ≅ SL(n) × ℝ₊**

separates:
- **SL(n)**: Volume-preserving gauge symmetries
- **ℝ₊**: Refinement hierarchy (scaling)

Refinement by factor m ≥ 2 corresponds to the scaling matrix A_m = m^{-1/n}·I with det(A_m) = m⁻¹.

From this, we derive:
1. **Geometric structure**: Voronoi/Delaunay duality from the mass metric
2. **Spectral structure**: spec(Ĥ) = {k·log(m) : k ∈ ℕ}
3. **Probabilistic structure**: Gibbs measure ω_β(k) ∝ m^{-βk}
4. **Categorical structure**: Functors between well-defined categories

## Building

```bash
# Install elan (Lean version manager)
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leanprover/elan/master/elan-init.sh -sSf | sh

# Clone and build
git clone https://github.com/RoyGBivens137/LEAN-Repository-for-Refinement-Operator-Calculus.git
cd LEAN-Repository-for-Refinement-Operator-Calculus
lake build
```

## Axiom Index

| # | Axiom | Reference |
|---|-------|-----------|
| 1 | `moser_equivalence` | Moser, Trans. AMS 120 (1965) |
| 2 | `moser_equivalence_poly` | Dacorogna–Moser, Ann. IHP 7 (1990) |
| 3 | `moser_jacobian_averages_to_one` | Corollary of Moser (1965) |
| 4 | `du_faber_gunzburger_existence` | Du–Faber–Gunzburger, SIAM Rev. 41 (1999) |
| 5 | `laguerre_weight_uniqueness` | Villani, Optimal Transport (2009) |
| 6 | `centroid_minimizes_energy` | Du–Faber–Gunzburger, Lemma 2.1 |
| 7 | `shape_similarity_forces_constant_step` | Tao–Vu, Additive Combinatorics (2006) |
| 8 | `entropy_sl_invariant_isotropic` | Ruelle, Thermodynamic Formalism (2004) |
| 9 | `weighted_coface_coface` | Desbrun et al., DEC (2005) |
| 10 | `offDiagonal_sum_zero` | Cartan (1922) |
| 11 | `diagonal_sum_identity` | Abraham–Marsden (1978) |
| 12 | `cyclic_tower_rigidity` | Lazard, Publ. Math. IHÉS 26 (1965) |

## Connection to Physics

### Noncommutative Geometry
The spectral action S[D] = Tr(f(D/Λ)) and heat kernel Tr(e^{-tD²}) arise as special cases when D² = Ĥ is the refinement Hamiltonian.

### Wheeler–DeWitt
The KMS stationarity condition implies Ĥ|Ω_β⟩ = 0 in the GNS representation—the **refinement Wheeler–DeWitt constraint**.

## Citation

```bibtex
Submitted to the Springer Journal of Automated Reasoning December 4th 2025. Citation pending.
```

## Primary References

- Connes, A. *Noncommutative Geometry*. Academic Press, 1994.
- Lazard, M. "Groupes analytiques p-adiques." Publ. Math. IHÉS 26, 1965.
- Moser, J. "On the volume elements on a manifold." Trans. AMS 120, 1965.
- Du, Faber, Gunzburger. "Centroidal Voronoi tessellations." SIAM Review 41(4), 1999.
- Villani, C. *Optimal Transport: Old and New*. Springer, 2009.

## Acknowledgments

AI assistance from Anthropic's Claude, OpenAI's ChatGPT, and Google's Gemini in strengthening proofs and formalization. Special Thanks to UF Mathematics/Physics and FSU Scientific Computing for their discussions and kindness during the construction of this work.

## License

Apache 2.0

Commit message:

Revise citation information in README.md
Updated citation section to reflect current status and submission details.

README.md, after:

# Geometric Refinement Theory

**A Machine-Verified Categorical Framework Unifying Geometry, Spectral Theory, and Probability**

[![Lean 4](https://img.shields.io/badge/Lean-4-blue.svg)](https://leanprover.github.io/)
[![Mathlib](https://img.shields.io/badge/Mathlib-latest-green.svg)](https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib4)
[![CI](https://github.com/RoyGBivens137/LEAN-Repository-for-Refinement-Operator-Calculus/actions/workflows/lean_action_ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/RoyGBivens137/LEAN-Repository-for-Refinement-Operator-Calculus/actions)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache_2.0-orange.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/Apache-2.0)

## Overview

This repository contains a **Lean 4 formalization** of Geometric Refinement Theory (GRT), demonstrating that geometry, probability, and spectral physics arise from a single algebraic primitive: the GL(n) action on positive density fields (Jacobians).

The central result is the **Casimir Universality Theorem**, proving that the diagram

```
Geom ──────→ Spectral ──────→ Gibbs
  │                              │
  └──────────────────────────────┘
              (commutes)
```

commutes via the partition function Z(β) = Tr(e^{-βĤ}).

## Key Results

| Result | Description | Proof Status |
|--------|-------------|--------------|
| Casimir Universality | Categorical functor composition equality | `rfl` |
| Coboundary Nilpotency | d² = 0 for discrete exterior calculus | Proved |
| Cartan Identity | dκ + κd = (p+1)·id on p-cochains | Proved |
| Partition Function | Z(β) = 1/(1 - m^{-β}) | Proved |
| Gibbs Normalization | Σ ω_β(k) = 1 | Proved |

## File Structure

```
├── CombinatorialDEC.lean      # Discrete exterior calculus (358 lines, 0 sorry)
├── RefinementAxioms.lean      # 11 axioms with Hodge theory
├── RefinementAlgebra.lean     # GL(n) action and rigidity
├── CasimirUniversality.lean   # Main theorem (339 lines, 0 sorry)
└── lakefile.toml              # Build configuration
```

**Total: 12 axioms**, each corresponding to established results from optimal transport, discrete exterior calculus, and profinite group theory.

## The Core Idea

Refinement is fundamentally algebraic. The decomposition

**GL(n) ≅ SL(n) × ℝ₊**

separates:
- **SL(n)**: Volume-preserving gauge symmetries
- **ℝ₊**: Refinement hierarchy (scaling)

Refinement by factor m ≥ 2 corresponds to the scaling matrix A_m = m^{-1/n}·I with det(A_m) = m⁻¹.

From this, we derive:
1. **Geometric structure**: Voronoi/Delaunay duality from the mass metric
2. **Spectral structure**: spec(Ĥ) = {k·log(m) : k ∈ ℕ}
3. **Probabilistic structure**: Gibbs measure ω_β(k) ∝ m^{-βk}
4. **Categorical structure**: Functors between well-defined categories

## Building

```bash
# Install elan (Lean version manager)
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leanprover/elan/master/elan-init.sh -sSf | sh

# Clone and build
git clone https://github.com/RoyGBivens137/LEAN-Repository-for-Refinement-Operator-Calculus.git
cd LEAN-Repository-for-Refinement-Operator-Calculus
lake build
```

## Axiom Index

| # | Axiom | Reference |
|---|-------|-----------|
| 1 | `moser_equivalence` | Moser, Trans. AMS 120 (1965) |
| 2 | `moser_equivalence_poly` | Dacorogna–Moser, Ann. IHP 7 (1990) |
| 3 | `moser_jacobian_averages_to_one` | Corollary of Moser (1965) |
| 4 | `du_faber_gunzburger_existence` | Du–Faber–Gunzburger, SIAM Rev. 41 (1999) |
| 5 | `laguerre_weight_uniqueness` | Villani, Optimal Transport (2009) |
| 6 | `centroid_minimizes_energy` | Du–Faber–Gunzburger, Lemma 2.1 |
| 7 | `shape_similarity_forces_constant_step` | Tao–Vu, Additive Combinatorics (2006) |
| 8 | `entropy_sl_invariant_isotropic` | Ruelle, Thermodynamic Formalism (2004) |
| 9 | `weighted_coface_coface` | Desbrun et al., DEC (2005) |
| 10 | `offDiagonal_sum_zero` | Cartan (1922) |
| 11 | `diagonal_sum_identity` | Abraham–Marsden (1978) |
| 12 | `cyclic_tower_rigidity` | Lazard, Publ. Math. IHÉS 26 (1965) |

## Connection to Physics

### Noncommutative Geometry
The spectral action S[D] = Tr(f(D/Λ)) and heat kernel Tr(e^{-tD²}) arise as special cases when D² = Ĥ is the refinement Hamiltonian.

### Wheeler–DeWitt
The KMS stationarity condition implies Ĥ|Ω_β⟩ = 0 in the GNS representation—the **refinement Wheeler–DeWitt constraint**.

## Citations 

Currently a work in progress. Building infrastructure for eventual submission to Journal of Noncommutative Geometry awaiting an axiom free build.

## Primary References

- Connes, A. *Noncommutative Geometry*. Academic Press, 1994.
- Lazard, M. "Groupes analytiques p-adiques." Publ. Math. IHÉS 26, 1965.
- Moser, J. "On the volume elements on a manifold." Trans. AMS 120, 1965.
- Du, Faber, Gunzburger. "Centroidal Voronoi tessellations." SIAM Review 41(4), 1999.
- Villani, C. *Optimal Transport: Old and New*. Springer, 2009.

## Acknowledgments

AI assistance from Anthropic's Claude, OpenAI's ChatGPT, and Google's Gemini in strengthening proofs and formalization. Special Thanks to UF Mathematics/Physics and FSU Scientific Computing for their discussions and kindness during the construction of this work.

## License

Apache 2.0
